Standards and guidelines
The Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Unit has developed and/or adapted a range of methods and tools that are used across the Secretariat in the planning, monitoring and evaluation of IUCN projects, programmes and organizational units.

PM&E methods and tools include:

The IUCN Project Guidelines and Standards - Version 2.2 (2016)
Managing Evaluations in IUCN: A Guide for IUCN Programme and Project Managers (2004)
Guide for the Planning and Conduct of IUCN Strategic Reviews (2004)
The IUCN Project Guidelines and Standards - Version 2.2 (2016)
The Project Guidelines and Standards (PGS) is a roadmap and toolkit for selecting, identifying, planning, implementing, monitoring, evaluating and closing IUCN projects, whether IUCN is acting as an implementing or executing agency.

It is available in our project tools section.

Managing Evaluations at IUCN
For the most up-to-date guidance on evaluation please see Module 5 of the Project Guidelines and Standards 2016. Module 5 is based closely on the stand-alone guide published in 2004.

About the guide: Each year in IUCN project and programme managers plan and commission numerous evaluations and reviews. Many of these evaluations are required by donor contracts and some are self-initiated by programme managers.

Meta-Evaluations in 2000 and 2003 revealed that the quality of these evaluations often vary, and that some do not meet acceptable standards for good evaluation practice. This Handbook -Managing Evaluations: A Guide for IUCN Programme and Project Managers - was written to assist managers in planning, commissioning and implementing high quality evaluations. It includes guidance in developing a good Terms of Reference for an evaluation, identifying standard evaluation criteria to use for different purposes, developing key evaluation questions, how to determine the profile of a good evaluation team, and how to judge a good evaluation report.

This Handbook follows the criteria and standards set out in the IUCN Evaluation Policy and operationalizes the policy in practical terms.

A Guide for the Planning and Conduct of IUCN Strategic Reviews
IUCN undertakes a regular cycle of Strategic Reviews, which focus on key issues and questions related to the performance of organizational units such as Regional Offices, Global Thematic Programmes or Commissions. The Guide for the Planning and Conduct of IUCN Strategic Reviews provides an overview of the expected steps in the review process, the standards to which they should be carried out, and provides tools, ideas and tips on the things "to do" or "not to forget". It also provides examples of data collection instruments (questionnaires and interview protocols) that have been used in past Reviews and can be adapted for future Reviews.
